MCO-1026: Enhancement for bootc integration into MCO (#1631)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/machine-config/alignment-with-image-mode-rhel-for-the-mco.md

### User Stories

* As an OpenShift cluster administrator I would like MCO to leverage RHEL disk images to boot/update my nodes
* As an Openshift administrator, I would like to reset a config I have applied without manual deletion that may cause node degradation, but via an image rollback.
* As an OpenShift cluster administrator, I would like my cluster to understand and to be able to (automatically) target a new Openshift/RHCOS container image reference to boot for upgrade.

> * As an Openshift support engineer, I would like to easily reproduce the settings and issues my client runs into by booting according to their image queue. 

Reviewer: image queue? Do we mean their custom image here?

Reviewer 2: Also unfamiliar with "image queue" in this context.

Reviewer 3: I would maybe just say "booting into their image"?

### Goals

> * Future Day-2 configuration owned by the MCO will, by default, involve building container images from config specification and layer the image by rpm-ostree rebase / bootc switch. 

Reviewer: We should drop rpm-ostree rebase here and leave just bootc switch.

* Enable the user to upgrade their cluster to a rpm-ostree-based image-mode cluster and to a bootc-based image-mode cluster seamlessly 

### Non-Goals

> * On Cluster Layering

Reviewer: We can mention that OCL effort is tracked in a different KEP.

* Bootc Day-2 Configuration Tools 
    - Description: Bootc has opened a door for disk image customization via configmap. Switching from rpm-ostree to bootc, MCO should not only make sure all the functionality remains but also proactively extending its support to make sure all the customization power brought in by bootc are directed to the user, allowing them to fully maximize these advantages.This will involve creating a new user-side API for fetching admin-defined configuration and pairing MCO with a bootc day-2 configuration tool for applying the customizations. Interest and Proposals in which has been raised several times in previous discussions.
    - Why non-goal: This is a valid request and will enhance user experience by increasing customization option.This is a non-goal for this enhancement because this request should be the next step after bootc switch happening. It will be announced and discussed in detail in a follow-up enhancement. 

> * Splitting the RHCOS Image into layers

Reviewer: We can mention that this is covered in another KEP.

## Proposal

> The efforts needed to fully align the MCO with Image Mode RHEL in 4.19 or 4.20 can be divided into three crucial phases, each building upon the previous one. In the section below, we will include a detailed description and dependency recognitions for each phase. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The efforts needed to fully align the MCO with Image Mode RHEL in 4.19 or 4.20 can be divided into three phases, each building upon the previous one. In the section below, we include a detailed description and dependencies for each phase. 
```

> Phase 1 On Cluster Layering GA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Phase 1: On Cluster Layering GA
```

> On-Cluster Layering introduces a seamlessly image-based configuration flow with details summarized as follows: “perform an on-cluster build (OCB) to combine the base OS image shipped with OpenShift, any admin-provided custom content, and the MachineConfig content managed by the MCO. This image will then be deployed to all of the cluster nodes using rpm-ostree (and later, bootc) to facilitate a singular, transactional, update”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On-Cluster Layering introduces a seamless image-based configuration flow with details summarized as follows: “perform an on-cluster build (OCB) to combine the base OS image shipped with OpenShift, any admin-provided custom content, and the MachineConfig content managed by the MCO. This image is then deployed to all of the cluster nodes using rpm-ostree (and later, bootc) to facilitate a singular, transactional, update”
```

> On-Cluster Layering is already shipped in a tech preview version in 4.16. Currently, we are targeting 4.18 for its GA. In this phase, we are aiming that, by the time On Cluster Layering GA, it will stably support most day-2 configurations specified by machine config and ship the change as a container image layer, which include osImageURL specification (DONE), extensions and kernel changes (PLANNED) and file writing to mutable local file system directories (DONE). Another important GA criteria for On Cluster Layering and Phase 1 is that, currently, On Cluster Layering is only a day-2 configuration tool for Openshift, with the workflow being that you install a cluster and then opt in to it. We need to figure out an On Cluster Layering day-1 configuration story so that people are installing a cluster with it.

Reviewer: nit: Add link to OCL KEP

> On-Cluster Layering is already shipped in a tech preview version in 4.16. Currently, we are targeting 4.18 for its GA. In this phase, we are aiming that, by the time On Cluster Layering GA, it will stably support most day-2 configurations specified by machine config and ship the change as a container image layer, which include osImageURL specification (DONE), extensions and kernel changes (PLANNED) and file writing to mutable local file system directories (DONE). Another important GA criteria for On Cluster Layering and Phase 1 is that, currently, On Cluster Layering is only a day-2 configuration tool for Openshift, with the workflow being that you install a cluster and then opt in to it. We need to figure out an On Cluster Layering day-1 configuration story so that people are installing a cluster with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On-Cluster Layering is already shipped as a tech preview version in 4.16. Currently, we are targeting 4.18 for its GA. In this phase, we are aiming that, by the time On Cluster Layering GA, it will support most day-2 configurations specified by machine config and ship the change as a container image layer, which include osImageURL specification (DONE), extensions and kernel changes (PLANNED) and file writing to mutable local file system directories (DONE). Another important GA criteria for On Cluster Layering and Phase 1 is that, currently, On Cluster Layering is only a day-2 configuration tool for Openshift, with the workflow being that you install a cluster and then opt in to it. We need to figure out an On Cluster Layering day-1 configuration story so that users can install a cluster with it.
```

> Phase 2 Move to Layered Update Path by Default 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Phase 2: Move to Layered Update Path by Default 
```

  * "Default" MCO managed configuration moved to /usr and shipped as a container image layer: Includes all MCO specific config rendered to /usr + MachineConfigs which are rendered to /etc -> /usr/etc (to be confirmed) 
  * Configs that involve file writing to immutable local file system directories need to be handled: The immutable CoreOS model guards the immutability of certain directories. With that being said, if we write a file (e.g. SSH key) to an immutable directory during an OS image build and use rpm-ostree to rebase onto the newly built OS image, that file will not actually be there when the node reboots. 
  * Address functionality gap between bootc and rpm-ostree: figure out a story for kernel argument changes as a container image layer/label 
  * Carve a path for changes made to nodes without applying MachineConfig like changes made by other OCP operators (e.g. SRIO-V) or MCO cert writing.

> Phase 3 Deprecate rpm-ostree and Move Layered Image Update Path to Bootc 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Phase 3: Deprecate rpm-ostree and Move Layered Image Update Path to Bootc 
```

Upon completion of the above, the last step is to update the image rollout mechanism. In the foreseeable future, we will be expecting a dual-stream RHCOS where rpm-ostree will be gradually deprecated and transition its responsibility to bootc. Following this trend, MCO will also enable image deployment by both “rpm-ostree rebase” and “bootc switch” and, in the end, settle down on “bootc switch” for image rollout. 

### Workflow Description

1. The cluster administrator wants to add new configuration to the OS on each of their cluster nodes.

> 2. The cluster administrator specifies base OS image pull spec & secret, base OS extension pull spec, rendered image pull spec & secret , rendered image push spec & secret and custom content through MachineOSConfig object 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The cluster administrator specifies base OS image pull spec & secret, base OS extension pull spec, rendered image pull spec & secret, rendered image push spec & secret and custom content through a MachineOSConfig object.
```

> 3. The cluster administrator specifies machine configuration through MachineConfig object 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The cluster administrator specifies machine configuration through MachineConfig object.
```

4. The Machine Config Controller will read the MachineConfig, check reconcilability and render a rendered-MachineConfig. 
5. The BuildController detects a build request from new MachineOSConfig/MachineConfig creation and creates a build. A new MachineOSBuild object will be created to track build progress and mark targeted rendered-MachineConfig.

> 6. The built image will be pushed to the rendered image push spec specified in the MachineOSConfig object (Step 2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. The built image will be pushed to the rendered image push spec specified in the MachineOSConfig object (Step 2).
```

> 7. The MachineConfigDaemon will then drain the node and call “bootc switch” to roll the newly built image to the node, and reboot the node upon completion 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. The MachineConfigDaemon will then drain the node and call “bootc switch” to roll the newly built image to the node, and reboot the node upon completion.
```

> 8. If required, cluster administrator can roll back to previous image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. If required, cluster administrator can roll back to previous image.
```

    - What will the update path look like if certain config changes are not baked into the image because (1) We normally don’t write them through MachineConfig (e.g. cert writings) (2) Less reboot is favored by Node Disruption Policies?
    - Certain config changes that the MCO watches don't trigger reboots, but it remains unknown if moving to layered update path by default can promise this too.

## Test Plan

* Phase 1: Please refer to On Cluster Layering enhancement for more details  
* Phase 2: TBD 
* Phase 3 : Bootc Switch Over 
    - Develop an e2e test suite and run payloads with bootc: Tests should target the TestOSImageURL, TestKernelArguments, TestKernelType and TestExtensions. Results will be used to discuss whether bootc is ready to perform rpm-ostree’s tasks.
    - Create a bootc experimentation sandbox by having the BootcNodeManagement FG: When the FG is on, the rpm-ostree commands will be replaced by equivalent bootc commands to manually test the capability of bootc in non-layered machine configuration workflow. Switch back to rpm-ostree as the default option when not compatible. This experimentation prepares for Scenario 1 in the following section. 

>     - Test bootc with On Cluster Layering: When the BootcNodeManagement and OnClusterBuild FG is on, On Cluster Layering will be the default path for machine configuration, accompanied by bootc who is responsible for image roll out. This test prepares for Scenario 2 in the following section.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Test bootc with On Cluster Layering: When the BootcNodeManagement and OnClusterBuild FG is on, On Cluster Layering will be the default path for machine configuration, accompanied by bootc which is responsible for image roll out. This test prepares for Scenario 2 in the following section.  
```

## Graduation Criteria

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

There are three cases we should consider and try to support under tech preview
  * Scenario 1: We don’t have layered update path as the default, but we start to provide rpm-ostree + bootc dual support (likely in 4.17 and 4.18)
  * Scenario 2: We now have layered update path as the default and we still have rpm-ostree + bootc dual support (likely in 4.19)
  * Scenario 3: We have completed the switch over to layered update path + bootc for image management + dnf for package management (likely in  4.20)

### Tech Preview -> GA

* Unit and E2E test coverage for the two criteria mentioned above 
* Unit and E2E test coverage for the two criteria mentioned above 

> * The GA of this enhancement is also dependent on:

Reviewer: Add bootc itself GA

    - On Cluster Layering GA 
    - Move to Layered Update Path by Default GA

>     - Split RHCOS into Layers & Image Compose 

Reviewer: Should be orthogonal

Reviewer 2: Still outstanding. I don't think this needs to be a hard requirement for GA.

Reviewer 4: Fixed

### User Stories

* As an OpenShift cluster administrator I would like MCO to leverage RHEL disk images to boot/update my nodes
* As an Openshift administrator, I would like to reset a config I have applied without manual deletion that may cause node degradation, but via an image rollback.
* As an OpenShift cluster administrator, I would like my cluster to understand and to be able to (automatically) target a new Openshift/RHCOS container image reference to boot for upgrade.
* As an Openshift support engineer, I would like to easily reproduce the settings and issues my client runs into by booting according to their image queue. 

### Goals

* Future Day-2 configuration owned by the MCO will, by default, involve building container images from config specification and layer the image by bootc switch. 
* Enable the user to upgrade their cluster to a rpm-ostree-based image-mode cluster and to a bootc-based image-mode cluster seamlessly 

### Non-Goals

* On Cluster Layering [Discussed in detail in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1515]

> * Bootc Day-2 Configuration Tools 
>     - Description: Bootc has opened a door for disk image customization via configmap. Switching from rpm-ostree to bootc, MCO should not only make sure all the functionality remains but also proactively extending its support to make sure all the customization power brought in by bootc are directed to the user, allowing them to fully maximize these advantages.This will involve creating a new user-side API for fetching admin-defined configuration and pairing MCO with a bootc day-2 configuration tool for applying the customizations. Interest and Proposals in which has been raised several times in previous discussions.
>     - Why non-goal: This is a valid request and will enhance user experience by increasing customization option.This is a non-goal for this enhancement because this request should be the next step after bootc switch happening. It will be announced and discussed in detail in a follow-up enhancement. 

Reviewer 2: This seems to be going into the weeds a bit too much. I think I would summarize it as:

```suggestion
* Bootc Day-2 Configuration Tools: new bootc features like the [planned configmap support](https://github.com/containers/bootc/issues/22) are of interest to the MCO but not in scope in this initial work to align with image-mode for RHEL.
```

Reviewer 4: Fixed

On-Cluster Layering is already shipped as a tech preview version in 4.16. Currently, we are targeting 4.18 for its GA. In this phase, we are aiming that, by the time On Cluster Layering GA, it will support most day-2 configurations specified by machine config and ship the change as a container image layer, which include osImageURL specification (DONE), extensions and kernel changes (PLANNED) and file writing to mutable local file system directories (DONE). Another important GA criteria for On Cluster Layering and Phase 1 is that, currently, On Cluster Layering is only a day-2 configuration tool for Openshift, with the workflow being that you install a cluster and then opt in to it. We need to figure out an On Cluster Layering day-1 configuration story so that users can install a cluster with it.

### Phase 2: Move to Layered Update Path by Default 

> After On Clustering GA, we will gradually deprecate the current configuration method of direct file writing to disk and move to layered update path (Phase 1) by default. At the end of this phase, OCP nodes will be configured in a full image-based way and will have a RHEL-bootc layer, a CoreOS layer, an OCP node layer, and day-2 configuration layers added on top built and rolled out by On Cluster Layering discussed in Phase 1. Please note here that the proposal and implementation details of the first three layers (the RHEL-bootc layer, the CoreOS layer and the OCP node layer) are explained in the Splitting the RHCOS Image into layers  enhancement, thus a non-goal for this enhancement. Some of the gaps we observed here are:

Reviewer 2: How the node image onto which we layer the MachineConfig bits is built/itself composed of layers should be transparent to this work and is mostly orthogonal (i.e. it could happen before or after).

I.e. I'm not sure it's useful to reference those details here.

```suggestion
After On Clustering GA, we will gradually deprecate the current configuration method of direct file writing to disk and move to layered update path (Phase 1) by default. At the end of this phase, OCP nodes will be configured in a full image-based way and day-2 configuration layers added on top of the node image will be built and rolled out by On Cluster Layering discussed in Phase 1. Some of the gaps we observed here are:
```

Reviewer 4: Fixed

  * "Default" MCO managed configuration moved to /usr and shipped as a container image layer: Includes all MCO specific config rendered to /usr + MachineConfigs which are rendered to /etc -> /usr/etc (to be confirmed) 

>   * Configs that involve file writing to immutable local file system directories need to be handled: The immutable CoreOS model guards the immutability of certain directories. With that being said, if we write a file (e.g. SSH key) to an immutable directory during an OS image build and use rpm-ostree to rebase onto the newly built OS image, that file will not actually be there when the node reboots. 

Reviewer 3: https://containers.github.io/bootc/building/guidance.html#understanding-mutability and https://containers.github.io/bootc/filesystem.html cover this too

>   * Configs that involve file writing to immutable local file system directories need to be handled: The immutable CoreOS model guards the immutability of certain directories. With that being said, if we write a file (e.g. SSH key) to an immutable directory during an OS image build and use rpm-ostree to rebase onto the newly built OS image, that file will not actually be there when the node reboots. 

Reviewer 4: Fixed

>   * Address functionality gap between bootc and rpm-ostree: figure out a story for kernel argument changes as a container image layer/label 

Reviewer 2: There's some support for this now: https://containers.github.io/bootc/building/kernel-arguments.html

Reviewer 4: Fixed

  * Carve a path for changes made to nodes without applying MachineConfig like changes made by other OCP operators (e.g. SRIO-V) or MCO cert writing.

### Phase 3: Deprecate rpm-ostree and Move Layered Image Update Path to Bootc 

> Upon completion of the above, the last step is to update the image rollout mechanism. In the foreseeable future, we will be expecting a dual-stream RHCOS where rpm-ostree will be gradually deprecated and transition its responsibility to bootc. Following this trend, MCO will also enable image deployment by both “rpm-ostree rebase” and “bootc switch” and, in the end, settle down on “bootc switch” for image rollout. 

Reviewer 4: This is referring to the point at which we are supporting both `rpm-ostree rebase` and `bootc switch` as we haven't completely deprecated rpm-ostree yet. IIRC from the discussions, we never plan to ship this interim phase to customers but this will be a phase we need to cross when implementing and testing out the move to bootc. That is why the final phase of all this is to do the final move to `bootc switch` after OCL is GA and layered update path is made the default.

> Upon completion of the above, the last step is to update the image rollout mechanism. In the foreseeable future, we will be expecting a dual-stream RHCOS where rpm-ostree will be gradually deprecated and transition its responsibility to bootc. Following this trend, MCO will also enable image deployment by both “rpm-ostree rebase” and “bootc switch” and, in the end, settle down on “bootc switch” for image rollout. 

Reviewer 2: Proposal: instead of using the term "dual-stream" for this, which already has a meaning in OCP, let's use e.g. "dual support" consistently as used below?

> Upon completion of the above, the last step is to update the image rollout mechanism. In the foreseeable future, we will be expecting a dual-stream RHCOS where rpm-ostree will be gradually deprecated and transition its responsibility to bootc. Following this trend, MCO will also enable image deployment by both “rpm-ostree rebase” and “bootc switch” and, in the end, settle down on “bootc switch” for image rollout. 

Reviewer 4: fixed

### Workflow Description

1. The cluster administrator wants to add new configuration to the OS on each of their cluster nodes.

> 2. The cluster administrator specifies base OS image pull spec & secret, base OS extension pull spec, rendered image pull spec & secret, rendered image push spec & secret and custom content through a MachineOSConfig object.

Reviewer 4: Having a common field for both secrets when they are the same comes under the OCL feature. We can discuss this while finalizing the plans and remaining work to GA OCL.

### Drawbacks

[TBD]

## Open Questions [optional]

* Is Go binding for bootc a necessity for adapting a bootc update path in the MCO? 
    - Q: Currently, bootc does not have go binding which will make it hard to read its status and deployment. It seems that we will need to create a Go library for client side interactions with bootc (similar to: https://github.com/coreos/rpmostree-client-go) Colin has suggested a way to auto-generate it (see comment in https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MCO-1026), which would be the most ideal solution. Workarounds should also be available, making go binding a non-goal item for this enhancement. 
    - A: Go bindings for bootc is not a must and, as a result, will be outside of the scope of this enhancement and will not be implemented. The main purpose of creating go bindings for rpm-ostree/bootc is to have an easier way to parse the created json and to read the status of rpm-ostree/bootc. This can be done via creating a simple wrapper function inside of the MCO. It will make sense to separate it out to a standalone helper/library in the future when the demand raises, but is a non-goal for now.

* Discussion question for gaps highlighted in phase 2 

>     - Q: A problem with the current model is that configs that involve file writing to local file system directories are not respected by “rpm-ostree rebase” / “bootc switch”. For example, if we write an SSH key to “/home/core/.ssh/authorized_keys'' directory during an OS image build and use rpm-ostree to rebase onto the newly built OS image, that file will not actually be there when the node reboots. Will this be handled/considered in the future planning of RHCOS and bootc? 

Reviewer 2: This is related to my earlier comment about `/var`.

Reviewer 4: Fixed based on the comment earlierhttps://github.com/containers/bootc/issues/76

        - For the time being, the MCO will have to keep some of the file writing workflow in place until bootc can support this. Timeline for when bootc will be able to add this support is to be determined. 

* Questions raised alongside “moving to layered update path by default”:
    - Q: 
        - Should all config be built into the image? 
        - What will the update path look like if certain config changes are not baked into the image because (1) We normally don’t write them through MachineConfig (e.g. cert writings) (2) Less reboot is favored by Node Disruption Policies?
        - Certain config changes that the MCO watches don't trigger reboots, but it remains unknown if “moving to layered update path by default” can promise this too.
    - A: 
        - Everything rebootless should not be in the image, unless we have live image changes. It is better for those changes to be in writable directories on the disk. Need to keep in mind the priority order of /usr vs /etc.
        - MCO would have to apply its own internal configs first then the MachineConfigs.

>         - [Actionable item] Get a list of files managed by the MCO to further refine this.

Reviewer 2: Avoiding reboots when possible isn't unique to OCP of course. I think ideally here we try to lower this functionality into bootc directly. See e.g. https://github.com/containers/bootc/issues/76 related to this.

    - Test bootc with On Cluster Layering: When the BootcNodeManagement and OnClusterBuild FG is on, On Cluster Layering will be the default path for machine configuration, accompanied by bootc which is responsible for image roll out. This test prepares for Scenario 2 in the following section.   

## Graduation Criteria

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

There are three cases we should consider and try to support under tech preview
  * Scenario 1: We don’t have layered update path as the default, but we start to provide rpm-ostree + bootc dual support (likely in 4.17 and 4.18)
  * Scenario 2: We now have layered update path as the default and we still have rpm-ostree + bootc dual support (likely in 4.19)
  * Scenario 3: We have completed the switch over to layered update path + bootc for image management + dnf for package management (likely in  4.20)

### Tech Preview -> GA

* Unit and E2E test coverage for the two criteria mentioned above 

> * Unit and E2E test coverage for the two criteria mentioned above 

Reviewer 2: Duplicate

Reviewer 2: Still outstanding

Reviewer 4: fixed

On-Cluster Layering is already shipped as a tech preview version in 4.16. Currently, we are targeting 4.18 for its GA. In this phase, we are aiming that, by the time On Cluster Layering GA, it will support most day-2 configurations specified by machine config and ship the change as a container image layer, which include osImageURL specification (DONE), extensions and kernel changes (PLANNED) and file writing to mutable local file system directories (DONE). Another important GA criteria for On Cluster Layering and Phase 1 is that, currently, On Cluster Layering is only a day-2 configuration tool for Openshift, with the workflow being that you install a cluster and then opt in to it. We need to figure out an On Cluster Layering day-1 configuration story so that users can install a cluster with it.

### Phase 2: Move to Layered Update Path by Default 

> After On Clustering GA, we will gradually deprecate the current configuration method of direct file writing to disk and move to layered update path (Phase 1) by default. At the end of this phase, OCP nodes will be configured in a full image-based way and will have a RHEL-bootc layer, a CoreOS layer, an OCP node layer, and day-2 configuration layers added on top of the node image will be built and rolled out by On Cluster Layering discussed in Phase 1. Some of the gaps we observed here are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After On Clustering GA, we will gradually deprecate the current configuration method of direct file writing to disk and move to layered update path (Phase 1) by default. At the end of this phase, OCP nodes will be configured in a full image-based way and will be built by layering day-2 configuration on top of the node image and rolled out by On Cluster Layering discussed in Phase 1. Some of the gaps we observed here are:
```

Reviewer 4: fixed

>   * "Default" MCO managed configuration moved to /usr and shipped as a container image layer: Includes all MCO specific config rendered to /usr + MachineConfigs which are rendered to /etc -> /usr/etc (to be confirmed) 

Reviewer 2: MachineConfigs we own can be moved to equivalent `/usr` paths when available (e.g. `/usr/lib/systemd/system/` for systemd units). Things that don't have a `/usr` equivalent can just stay in `/etc`.

The `/usr/etc` bit is an implementation detail on the ostree side and should be mostly transparent to us.

Reviewer 4: updated based on this

>   * Configs that involve file writing to immutable local file system directories need to be handled: The immutable CoreOS model guards the immutability of certain directories. With that being said, if we write a file (e.g. SSH key) to an immutable directory during an OS image build and use rpm-ostree to rebase onto the newly built OS image, that file will not actually be there when the node reboots - basically any path under */var* will be affected by this. In the interim, the MCO will continue to write these files manually onto the  nodes as it currently does. In the future, the plan is to move these files into */usr* or */etc* or use systemd-tmpfiles dropins instead.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I don't think this quite captures the issue. Let me try:

```suggestion
  * MachineConfigs that write to `/var` (this includes things like SSH keys under `/home`, which is really a symlink to `/var/home`) will need to keep being written by the MCO directly. In cases where we own the MachineConfig, we can look at whether there are `/usr` or `/etc` alternatives (or e.g. `tmpfiles.d` dropins) we can use, but in the general case and for customers, anything writing to `/var` can't be part of the layered image build since ostree by design ignores `/var` content when rolling out the update.
```

Does that help?

### Workflow Description

1. The cluster administrator wants to add new configuration to the OS on each of their cluster nodes.
2. The cluster administrator specifies base OS image pull spec & secret, base OS extension pull spec, rendered image pull spec & secret, rendered image push spec & secret and custom content through a MachineOSConfig object.
3. The cluster administrator specifies machine configuration through MachineConfig object.
4. The Machine Config Controller will read the MachineConfig, check reconcilability and render a rendered-MachineConfig. 
5. The BuildController detects a build request from new MachineOSConfig/MachineConfig creation and creates a build. A new MachineOSBuild object will be created to track build progress and mark targeted rendered-MachineConfig.
6. The built image will be pushed to the rendered image push spec specified in the MachineOSConfig object (Step 2).
7. The MachineConfigDaemon will then drain the node and call “bootc switch” to roll the newly built image to the node, and reboot the node upon completion.

> 8. If required, cluster administrator can roll back to previous image.

Reviewer 2: Worth adding details into how the admin triggers a rollback.

Reviewer 4: Fixed

    - Create a bootc experimentation sandbox by having the BootcNodeManagement FG: When the FG is on, the rpm-ostree commands will be replaced by equivalent bootc commands to manually test the capability of bootc in non-layered machine configuration workflow. Switch back to rpm-ostree as the default option when not compatible. This experimentation prepares for Scenario 1 in the following section. 
    - Test bootc with On Cluster Layering: When the BootcNodeManagement and OnClusterBuild FG is on, On Cluster Layering will be the default path for machine configuration, accompanied by bootc which is responsible for image roll out. This test prepares for Scenario 2 in the following section.   

## Graduation Criteria

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

There are three cases we should consider and try to support under tech preview
  * Scenario 1: We don’t have layered update path as the default, but we start to provide rpm-ostree + bootc dual support (likely in 4.18)
  * Scenario 2: We now have layered update path as the default and we still have rpm-ostree + bootc dual support (likely in 4.19)

>   * Scenario 3: We have completed the switch over to layered update path + bootc for image management + dnf for package management (likely in  4.20)

Reviewer 2: These sound more like milestones? I'm confused by the framing as scenarios.

Reviewer 4: These are stages we have divided the work into, so essentially milestones where we slowly add more and more support for layered update path and bootc.

### Tech Preview -> GA

* Unit and E2E test coverage for the two criteria mentioned above 
* Unit and E2E test coverage for the two criteria mentioned above 
* The GA of this enhancement is also dependent on:
    - Bootc GA
    - On Cluster Layering GA 
    - Move to Layered Update Path by Default GA
    - Split RHCOS into Layers & Image Compose 
    - Move to dnf Interface for RHCOS Package Install 
    - Local Package Layering on Bootc-based RHCOS 
* The GA of this enhancement will work with a dual-stream RHCOS 

### Removing a deprecated feature

> None

Reviewer 2: If all goes well, we should be able to remove the rpm-ostree path at some point in the future. Worth calling that out I think.

Reviewer 4: fixed
